feat: added article on using clerk in rust (#261)
shuttle-hq/www: _blog/2024-02-09-using-clerk-in-rust.mdx

---
title: "Using Clerk authentication in Rust"

> description: This article is on how to use Clerk authentication in Rust based back-end applications and little bit of an extension on integration of shared database using Shuttle. 

Reviewer: This can be a bit shorter and more consice. It can also mention the keywords (Actix, React, etc) that did not fit into the title.

Author: Sure I will add those as well

> description: This article is on how to use Clerk authentication in Rust based back-end applications and little bit of an extension on integration of shared database using Shuttle. 

Author: Sure, that aligns much better

author: sourabpramanik
tags: [rust, clerk, vite, guide]
thumb: 
cover: 
date: 
---

> In this article, I have shared how I built an Issue tracking application using Vite for the front-end, and [Shuttle](https://www.shuttle.rs/) and [Actix web](https://actix.rs/) for the back-end. In addition to that I have also used [Clerk](https://clerk.com/) for authentication in the front-end and protecting the endpoints in the back-end.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This article covers how I built an Issue tracking application using React for the front-end, and [Shuttle](https://www.shuttle.rs/) and [Actix web](https://actix.rs/) for the back-end. It also uses [Clerk](https://clerk.com/) for authentication in the front-end and protecting the endpoints in the back-end.
```

> In this article, I have shared how I built an Issue tracking application using Vite for the front-end, and [Shuttle](https://www.shuttle.rs/) and [Actix web](https://actix.rs/) for the back-end. In addition to that I have also used [Clerk](https://clerk.com/) for authentication in the front-end and protecting the endpoints in the back-end.

Reviewer 2: @sourabpramanik If it isn't too much of a hassle, would be good to replace the "I's" with "we'll be.." in the whole introduction as it encompasses both you and the readers reading it. So eg. "In this article, we'll be looking at how to build an Issue tracking application.."

Author: Right makes sense

Here is the [source code](https://github.com/sourabpramanik/issue-tracker) of the complete project if you want to follow along.

> To start this project I have used the template from Shuttle’s [example repository](https://github.com/shuttle-hq/shuttle-examples) that has a barebone setup of Vite, Shuttle, Actix web, and Clerk. 

Reviewer: Can you also add the link to the project running on Shuttle?

Author: Sorry I missed the main thing to mention my bad!

> The back-end uses [clerk-rs](https://github.com/DarrenBaldwin07/clerk-rs) crate to create a connection between the back-end application and Clerk project. This crate has many different APIs for different use cases, in the template there is back-end API to fetch all users record using `clerk-rs` user API. We can easily verify user's identity trying to access protected routes before hand using the `ClerkMiddleware` from the crate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The back-end uses the [clerk-rs](https://github.com/DarrenBaldwin07/clerk-rs) community crate to create a connection between the back-end application and Clerk project. This crate has many different APIs for different use cases, in the template there is back-end API to fetch all users record using the `clerk-rs` user API. We can easily verify a user's identity when trying to access protected routes using the `ClerkMiddleware` from the crate.
```

> The back-end uses [clerk-rs](https://github.com/DarrenBaldwin07/clerk-rs) crate to create a connection between the back-end application and Clerk project. This crate has many different APIs for different use cases, in the template there is back-end API to fetch all users record using `clerk-rs` user API. We can easily verify user's identity trying to access protected routes before hand using the `ClerkMiddleware` from the crate.

Author: Got that!

I have additionally used Postgres for the database which will run in a docker container so make sure you also have docker [installed](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/).

# Let's get started

First, we need to clone the template from the Shuttle’s example repository using Shuttle CLI:

```bash
cargo shuttle init --from shuttle-hq/shuttle-examples --subfolder actix-web/clerk

```

You will get a few prompts to create a new project using this template. Make sure you provide a unique name because when you deploy this project on Shuttle this project name will become the sub-domain. And once a name is taken it cannot be used for other project as well:

```bash
What do you want to name your project?
It will be hosted at ${project_name}.shuttleapp.rs, so choose something unique!
✔ Project name · <ENTER_PROJECT_NAME>
Where should we create this project?
✔ Directory · <ENTER_THE_DIRECTORY_NAME>
✔ Claim the project name <PROJECT_NAME> by starting a project container on Shuttle? <Y/N>

> ```

Reviewer: We can leave this out since the prompts might change in the future

Author: Cool

After that, `cd` into the project directory:

```bash
cd {project_name}

> ```

Reviewer: This can also be left out. The sentence above is verbose enough.

Author: Cool!

## Setup a new application in Clerk

> Head on to Clerk’s official website, sign in or sign up if don’t have an account, and create a new application in the dashboard.

Reviewer 2: @sourabpramanik *If you don't have an account

Give a name to your project and select the providers using which users can sign-in or sign-up in your application.

After that, you will get a **Publishable Key** and a **Secret key** which we will use later in our application.

> [https://gist.github.com/assets/61370770/7fb52565-605c-42e9-9a6a-3fc7e4855696](https://gist.github.com/assets/61370770/7fb52565-605c-42e9-9a6a-3fc7e4855696)

Reviewer: Can you add the file to the images folder and reference it as a domain-relative URL? This should also be an image tag with `!`

## Build the back-end

Now we can start updating the existing back-end code to write and build our own endpoints for our application.

`cd` into the backend:

```bash
cd backend

```

Copy the contents of `Secrets.example.toml` into a new `Secrets.toml` file:

```bash
touch Secrets.toml
cp Secrets.example.toml Secrets.toml

> ```

Reviewer: The cd command can be combined with the code block below to make it more compact

Copy the **Secret key** from the Clerk dashboard and add it to `Secrets.toml` :

```bash
CLERK_SECRET_KEY = "sk_test_vsWrxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxtfTr"

```

> ⚠️ Do not commit this file
> 

Now, we need to write a new migration in a `schema.sql` file which will create a new `issues` table in our Postgres database.

Create `schema.sql` and add the schema:

```sql
-- Create a non-existing table
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS issues (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  title VARCHAR(100) NOT NULL,
  description VARCHAR(300) NOT NULL,
  status VARCHAR(10) NOT NULL,
  label VARCHAR(10) NOT NULL,
  author VARCHAR NOT NULL
);

```

We can migrate this schema using **[SQLX](https://docs.rs/sqlx/latest/sqlx/)**. So add the SQLX crate to your dependency:

```bash
cargo add sqlx

```

To connect to a shared Postgres database managed by Shuttle you need to add the crate with features specific to Postgres and SQLX to your dependencies:

```bash
cargo add shuttle-shared-db -F shuttle-shared-db/postgres -F shuttle-shared-db/sqlx

```

> 🗨️ Even though the database is shared our data is protected and kept secured from other users by Shuttle.
> 

### Connect to the shared Postgres DB

> Let’s migrate this schema, `cd` into the `src` directory, and write some code in the `main.rs` file.

Reviewer: You can simplify as "edit the ... file", since not everyone use terminal editors

Author: Right!

The Clerk middleware will protect all the APIs that falls under the scope `/api`.

Try running the application using Shuttle CLI:

```bash
cargo shuttle run --port 8000

```

> 🗨️ Make sure docker is running in your local machine because after you run the above command Shuttle will pull the Postgres docker image and start a docker container.
> 

The back-end application can now query the Postgres database using SQLX. Let's create some **CRUD** endpoints for our application.

### Create Issue struct

To define the fields of an issue we will create a new struct that is used to define the response and request payload of our **Read, Update,** and **Delete** queries:

```rust
#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, FromRow)]
struct Issue {
    title: String,
    description: String,
    status: String,
    label: String,
    author: String,
}

```

### Create NewIssue struct

To define the new issue request payload for our create API endpoint we will use this struct:

```rust
#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, FromRow)]
struct NewIssue {
    title: String,
    description: String,
    status: String,
    label: String,
    author: String,
}

> ```

Reviewer: Why are these the same? Can't we use the same one for all cases?

            return HttpResponse::InternalServerError().json(serde_json::json!({
                "status":"FAILED",
                "message":"Something went wrong."
            }));
        }
    };

    HttpResponse::Ok().json(serde_json::json!({
        "status": "SUCCESS",
        "data": issue,
    }))
}

```

### Update issue by `id` endpoint

To update an issue by id we will use slug from the path which will contain the `issue_id` to query our database and update the record if it exists in the database. Before updating the record we can query if the record exists in the database or not:

```rust
#[patch("/issue/{issue_id}")]
async fn update_issue(
    payload: web::Json<NewIssue>,
    state: web::Data<AppState>,
    path: web::Path<i32>,
    req: HttpRequest,
) -> impl Responder {
    let issue_id = path.into_inner();

    let srv_req = ServiceRequest::from_request(req);

    let claim = match clerk_authorize(&srv_req, &state.client, true).await {
        Ok(value) => value.1,
        Err(_) => {
            return HttpResponse::Unauthorized().json(serde_json::json!({
                "status":"Failed",
                "message":"Unauthorized"
            }));
        }

>     };

Reviewer: It could be worth extracting this logic to a function since it is repeated several times in the endpoints.

    let query: Result<Issue, sqlx::Error> = sqlx::query_as("SELECT * FROM issues WHERE id=$1")
        .bind(issue_id)
        .fetch_one(&state.pool)
        .await;

    if query.is_err() {
        return HttpResponse::InternalServerError().json(serde_json::json!({
            "status":"FAILED",
            "message":"Issue does not exist."
        }));

>     }

Reviewer: This arm is redundant, the error gets handled by the match statement below.

                "message":"Issue does not exist."
            }));
        }
    }

    let delete_query: Result<Issue, sqlx::Error> = sqlx::query_as("DELETE FROM issues WHERE id=$1")
        .bind(issue_id)
        .fetch_one(&state.pool)
        .await;

    if delete_query.is_err() {
        return HttpResponse::InternalServerError().json(serde_json::json!({
            "status":"FAILED",
            "message":"Failed to delete the issue"
        }));
    }

    HttpResponse::Ok().json(serde_json::json!({
        "status": "SUCCESS",
        "message":"Deleted successfully"
    }))
}

```

### Get user by `id`

We need on last endpoint which can fetch the user details by their `user_id`, this API will be used to fetch issue author metadata from Clerk:

```rust
#[get("/user/{user_id}")]
async fn get_user_by_id(state: web::Data<AppState>, path: web::Path<String>) -> impl Responder {
    let user_id = path.into_inner();
    let Ok(user) = User::get_user(&state.client, &user_id).await else {
        return HttpResponse::InternalServerError().json(serde_json::json!({
            "status": "FAILED",
            "message": "Unable to retrieve all users",
        }));
    };

>     HttpResponse::Ok().json(Into::<UserModel>::into(user))

Reviewer: Mention in the article text that this was adapted from existing code in the template, so that the reader konws where `UserModel` is from.

The data of the payload should match the `IssueSchema` but it should not have the `id` field to it as it is a new record, so to remove `id` field we have used `Omit<IssueSchema, "id">` which creates a new type from the type provide in the first parameter and omits all those fields passed to it after the first parameter in our case it is the `id` field:

```tsx
export const useCreateIssue = () => {
    const { setClose } = useIssueModalStore();

    const create = (url: string, { arg }: { arg: Omit<IssueSchema, "id"> }) => fetch(url, {
        method: "POST",
        headers: {
            Accept: "application/json",
            "Content-Type": "application/json",
        },
        body: JSON.stringify(arg),
    }).then(res => res.json())

    const { mutate: revalidateIssuesList } = useSWRConfig();

    const { isMutating, trigger } = useSWRMutation("/api/issue", create, {
        onSuccess() {
            toast.success("Issue has been created.");
            setClose();
            revalidateIssuesList("/api/issues")
        },
        onError(err) {
            if (err.message) {
                toast.error(err.message);
            } else {

>                 toast.error("Falied to create the issue.");

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                toast.error("Failed to create issue");
```

            }
        },
    })

    return { isMutating, trigger }
}

```

> > 🗨️ We need specify the content type header as `application/json` in the fetch calls because by default fetch API sets the content type header to `text/plain` which causes an incorrect content error as the back-end we have created expects a JSON payload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 🗨️ We need to specify the content type header as `application/json` in the fetch calls because by default fetch API sets the content type header to `text/plain` which causes an incorrect content error as the back-end we have created expects a JSON payload.
```

> 

**Update/Edit issue hook**

This hook consumes the update issue by `id` API and similar to the create issue hook it also returns `isMutating` property and `trigger` method.

We have used the `setClose` method from the `useIssueModalStore` to close the issue modal once the issue has been updated successfully

```tsx
export const useEditIssue = () => {
    const { setClose } = useIssueModalStore();

    const edit = (url: string, { arg }: { arg: IssueSchema }) => fetch(`${url}/${arg.id}`, {
        method: "PATCH",
        headers: {
            Accept: "application/json",
            "Content-Type": "application/json",
        },
        body: JSON.stringify(arg),
    }).then(res => res.json())

    const { mutate: revalidateIssuesList } = useSWRConfig();

    const { isMutating, trigger } = useSWRMutation("/api/issue", edit, {
        onSuccess() {
            toast.success("Issue has been updated.");
            setClose();
            revalidateIssuesList("/api/issues")
        },
        onError(err) {
            if (err.message) {
                toast.error(err.message);
            } else {

>                 toast.error("Falied to update the issue.");

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                toast.error("Failed to update issue");
```

            }
        },
    })

    return { isMutating, trigger }
}

```

**Delete issue hook**

One final API integration, the delete API takes the `id` and also returns an object with `isMutating` field and `trigger` method:

```tsx
export const useDeleteIssue = () => {
    const { setClose } = useIssueModalStore();

    const remove = (url: string, { arg }: { arg: { id: string } }) => fetch(`${url}/${arg.id}`, {
        method: "DELETE",
    }).then(res => res.json())

    const { mutate: revalidateIssuesList } = useSWRConfig();

    const { isMutating, trigger } = useSWRMutation("/api/issue", remove, {
        onSuccess() {
            toast.success("Issue has been deleted.");
            setClose();
            revalidateIssuesList("/api/issues")
        },
        onError(err) {
            if (err.message) {
                toast.error(err.message);
            } else {

>                 toast.error("Falied to delete the issue.");

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                toast.error("Failed to delete issue");
```

The issue modal will have a form with a title input field, a description input field, a status select input field, and a label select input field.

**Using Zod**

First, we need to install Zod to define the schema for the form and add rules with helper messages to validate the user input:

```bash
npm install zod

```

Next, define the form schema:

```tsx
import { z } from "zod";
//...rest of the imports

const status = ["todo", "inprogress", "done", "backlog"] as const;
const label = ["bug", "feature", "documentation"] as const;
const formSchema = z.object({
  title: z.string().min(3, {
    message: "title must be at least 3 characters.",
  }),
  description: z.string().min(5, {
    message: "title must be at least 5 characters.",
  }),
  status: z.enum(status, {
    required_error: "You need to select a status.",
  }),
  label: z.enum(label, {
    required_error: "You need to select a label.",
  }),
  author: z.string({ required_error: "Author is required" }),
});

```

In the above code, we have created a label and a status enum for the select input field option. It should be the same as the expected label and status field value of the `IssueSchema`

**Using React Hook Form**

> Now, we need to install [**React Hook Form](https://react-hook-form.com/) f**or field validation and field state management:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we need to install [**React Hook Form**](https://react-hook-form.com/) for field validation and field state management:
```

            <UserButton afterSignOutUrl="/" />
          </div>
          <IssuesTable />
        </div>
      </SignedIn>
    </main>
  );
}

export default App;

```

### Update `main.tsx` file

Add the `Toaster` component from `sonner` and `IssueModal` :

```tsx
import React from "react";
import ReactDOM from "react-dom/client";
import App from "./App.tsx";
import "./index.css";
import { ClerkProvider } from "@clerk/clerk-react";
import { Toaster } from "@/components/ui/sonner";
import IssueModal from "@/components/issue-modal";

// Import your publishable key
const PUBLISHABLE_KEY = import.meta.env.VITE_CLERK_PUBLISHABLE_KEY;

if (!PUBLISHABLE_KEY) {
  throw new Error("Missing Publishable Key");
}

ReactDOM.createRoot(document.getElementById("root")!).render(
  <React.StrictMode>
    <ClerkProvider publishableKey={PUBLISHABLE_KEY}>
      <App />
      <Toaster />
      <IssueModal />
    </ClerkProvider>
  </React.StrictMode>
);

```

## Run the application

First, build your frontend application using this command:

```bash
npm run build
```

This will generate an optimized build in the `/frontend/dist` directory.

Finally run the backend using:

```bash

> cargo shuttle run --port 8000

Reviewer: 8000 is the default
```suggestion
cargo shuttle run
```

```

Open the highlighted URL in the browser window:

<img width="960" alt="Screenshot 2024-02-06 082641" src="[https://gist.github.com/assets/61370770/8a22b566-a930-494a-8ba6-cd92481a0113](https://gist.github.com/assets/61370770/8a22b566-a930-494a-8ba6-cd92481a0113)">

# **Deployment**

> Now you can deploy your app in the Shuttle’s managed platform by running **`cargo shuttle deploy`** (with the **`--allow-dirty`** flag if you have uncommitted changes). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can deploy your app in the Shuttle’s managed platform by running `cargo shuttle deploy` (with the `--allow-dirty` flag if you have uncommitted changes).
```
